Advertise your product or brand here
contact www.OpenSubtitles.org today
[Abbie] We heard that in August of 1994,
WJZ showed a retrospective clip...
of newsman Jerry Turner,
who got a phone call from a gentleman
who said he had information
about Cathy's murder
and he knew who had her rosary.
We were told that in this news clip,
they actually played some audio
of the phone call itself.
We haven't been able to access it
anywhere else,
so, we're hoping
it's on one of these tapes,
but there's a good-sized box
of tapes from August.
So, we'll see what we can find.
[Margaret] One day in the '90s,
I got a knock on the door.
It was Detective Tincher
and Detective Marll.
They brought a tape recorder,
and when they pressed play on the tape,
it was the Jerry Turner
call-in radio show.
And I'm hearing a disguised voice,
and he's calling in
to let Jerry Turner know that he knows
who has Sister Cesnik's rosary.
What a strange flashback into the past.
[man 1 on recording] It was a black case,
and it had the name Cesnik on it.
And he said this was her rosary.
[man 2] The rosary had Cesnik on it?
-[man 1] The case had Cesnik on it.
-[man 2] Oh, the case did.
[Margaret] And just a couple seconds
into disguising his voice,
he let the disguise down
and he clearly spoke like himself,
and I said, "My God, that's him."
It was Ed.
[man] Okay, Edgar?
Yeah, I wanted to show you--
Do you recognize this man?
Maskell.
I've seen his picture.
But I did not know him.
[man] So, you never met him?
No.
[man] And then this one?
That's Cathy.
[man] So, you told us
that the police thought you did it.
Can you talk about that?
When was that, and what did they--?
What did they think?
Oh, just questions.
[man] Questions about what?
Her.
And what happened to her.
I'm telling you the same thing
I told them.
I don't have the slightest idea.
[man]
Do you remember why they visited you?
My ex-wife.
[man] So, if she told...
the police at some point
that you came home covered in blood
that night,
is she telling the truth?
I don't know.
She said I did.
[man]
Your first wife, is she an honest person?
Oh, yeah.
[man] Do you remember having blood
on your shirt that night?
Mm-hm.
You do?
Why was that?
I hit my hand.
[man] You had what?
[man] You hit your hand?
Do you remember how you did that?
No.
[man] I'm gonna play this news clip
for you, okay?
[reporter on TV]
...then on January 3rd, 1970,
she turned up murdered
in a field in Lansdowne.
Police have followed up on numerous leads,
but none of them panned out,
not even the tape
of a still-unidentified caller
who told anchorman Jerry Turner in 1976
that he knew a man
who was carrying Sister Cesnik's rosary.
[man 1 on recording]
It was a black case,
and it had the name Cesnik on it.
And he said this was her rosary.
[man 2 on recording]
The rosary had Cesnik on it?
-[man 1] The case had Cesnik on it.
-[man 2] Oh, the case did.
[reporter] Police have followed up
on numerous leads, but not--
[man]
Was that you that called Jerry Turner?
Mm-hm.
-[man] That was your voice?
-Yes.
[man]
Did you know a guy with her rosary case?
No.
[man] Were you making up information?
Yes.
[man] Can you kind of just give me
a little bit of an explanation of that
so I understand it?
Because it doesn't make much sense to us.
Doesn't make much sense to me.
[man] I'm just trying to understand, then,
why you would have called
a popular radio show
many years later
to give information about that...
that led police and her family
to think that it might be a lead.
I was dumb, stupid.
[man] Did you perhaps...
lead your first wife to believe
you were involved in the murder
even though you weren't?
[Edgar] At first, yeah.
I let her believe it.
[man] That's kind of why we're here today,
because you led her to believe it,
and all these clues
and the Jerry Turner thing
make people think you were involved.
But did you--? Did you do it?
Did you kill Sister Cathy?
No.
[man] Do you have any information
about her murder?
No.
I had nothing to do with it.
Hi.
How are you?
I have one of these minds
that never stops, you know.
I mean, aren't you guys shocked
that this sort of thing can go on?
And nobody's fessed--
There's people that know.
-You remind me so much of her just in--
-We were so close.
Well, you're exuberant, and she was.
[Marilyn] This was an album that my mother
had given Cathy when she turned 18.
She was six and a half years older
than me.
She made me feel extremely special.
We shared a bedroom together.
Cathy was a sleeper,
and I was not a sleeper.
It took her forever one day to get up.
So, I had gone downstairs,
and my mother had made
some chocolate pudding,
and I painted her shoes.
Because she slept so long,
I had a lot of time to fill these slippers
with chocolate pudding.
And then when she got up,
I just sat there and watched her get up
and put her feet in
the chocolate pudding slippers, you know.
[laughs]
"What?"
If I were to play a joke on you,
it would be a one-upmanship
and you would have to figure out
how you were gonna get me back.
She never, ever got me back.
She's always told me
she loved me unconditionally.
She had the ability to do that.
And I probably tested that,
you know, a lot,
and she never, never wavered.
She taught me
what unconditional love means.
No matter what they do,
you're gonna love them.
I know it's been a long time
and it's hard for people to understand,
and a lot of people feel
that you can't grieve a lifetime.
You needed to have closure.
That's not it.
You just miss somebody in your life.
You miss not having that person there
for all the important things that happen.
And if it's five minutes,
if it's 45 years,
you still miss that person
and you can still feel that loss.
There is no reason for any secretiveness
or anything kept hidden or concealed.
When Cathy died, I said,
"You will not die as long as I'm alive.
You will not die."
I'm not letting this go.
I never came to peace. I shut up.
But I never came to peace.
You know?
I shut up for the sake of my parents.
And I always kept my mouth shut
for the sake of my mother,
but all these years,
I wanted to know who killed my sister.
All I knew was what I knew
all these years,
that it was probably the wrong place,
the wrong time.
It was a random killing,
and the police had zero evidence.
They found nothing.
When you go down
these family discussions with this,
then, you know, you start crying
and everybody gets really upset,
and my dad always would stop us
at that point and say,
"This doesn't bring Cathy back."
And the line was,
"She would not want you to cry, Marilyn."
My parents were very protective of me
because it was really,
really, really difficult.
And they had two little kids,
you know, to raise.
So, that's why, when my mother
passed away a year ago,
Bob and I had cleaned out her apartment,
and I was absolutely no help because
as soon as I started cleaning it out...
we found all this stuff.
I mean, there was boxes
all over the apartment.
I was trying to sort through everything.
That's when I found the articles
that my mother cut out.
She saved it all,
but she didn't tell me.
I mean, there's articles from '69,
and then there's articles from the '90s
that my mother saved
that was in the paper.
You know,
and I read that for the first time.
When you read this sort of thing, I mean,
it's hard to explain to you
what was going on,
because you read this, and it's like...
"What is this?"
It's a lot to absorb because it's so--
It's not what I have thought happened
for 45 years.
I didn't know the name Maskell
until my mother died.
I joined
the Baltimore County Police Department
in July of 1997,
and I went to the Homicide Unit
here in Baltimore County
in February of 2000.
I've been there ever since.
I'm new to the case, this is
a couple weeks into this cold case,
looking-- Re-looking at it.
I can only tell you this:
If there was any evidence
that anybody was involved in this murder,
Father Maskell or anybody else,
and that evidence was developed
by these investigators...
there would be no cover-up.
These allegations against Father Maskell
weren't brought about until the '90s.
He was investigated.
He was questioned.
He was looked at as a suspect.
As time went on,
he was looked at even harder.
He wouldn't talk about the allegations
of abuse.
He said he had nothing to do
with Sister Cesnik's death.
He denied... showing people certain things
and being involved in that.
Flat-out denied it.
But... let's be clear.
Nobody has been cleared yet
by us, that are now working on the case.
I mean, we haven't given up on anything
just 'cause it's 45, 47 years old.
We're not ruling out anybody.
This was from '69 when she was missing.
November 10th, 1969.
And I think this one--
I'm not sure where this one fits.
"Case priest--"
Yeah, this is all from '94 right there.
[Marilyn] Gemma and Abbie
seem to have so much information.
I cannot believe
that the police have not talked to them.
You know, I was trying to take this
in little pieces,
'cause it's a little overwhelming,
and trying to be protective of,
you know, my family, too,
and try to see how far I needed to go
in this investigation.
Okay, put it on.
[Bob] Okay. Is everybody ready?
[reporter on TV]
From a church in New Jersey,
a former priest reads the words
of a murdered nun.
[Gerry on TV] It's not quite the agony
to talk about it now as it was then.
But, you know, I really lost a, uh...
a fantastic human being.
[reporter] On November 7, 1969,
Cathy Cesnik was abducted...
[Marilyn]
Cathy cared deeply about a lot of people.
I just felt it was always
a little different with Gerry.
She said, "I really feel Gerry
will always be in my life.
He's someone that's very important to me."
I knew she cared,
but that was all I got out of her.
I got nothing else out of her.
After Cathy died,
my parents didn't want me
to talk to Gerry.
The way my dad told me is
they have to clear everybody.
Everybody that was involved
with Cathy has to be cleared.
I think the police might have told my dad
that they suspected him.
[Gerry] It took me ten very painful years
to recover from her death.
That was a long, tough journey.
What I needed to do eventually
was get away from all that...
so I could start over.
I went out to Minnesota
a celibate Jesuit priest,
came back 12 years later
a Methodist pastor,
married with two kids to Diane.
This-- Is this for drinking
or for putting into your cooking?
[Diane] Yes, for both.
[inaudible dialogue]
[Tom] Gemma and her crew told me
that they went with Koob
to the Carriage House.
They reviewed it all
and looked at where the car had been
and talked about all of that.
The way Gemma characterized that for me
was that Koob had an emotional catharsis.
I was a little bit distressed.
Let's leave it with that.
There are so many holes in his story
of what went on
at the Carriage House that night...
I'll tell you the truth,
I would take everything he says
with a gigantic boulder of salt.
I do not believe the things
that he told me.
[Gemma] There are three people
that were present in Cathy's apartment
all night after she disappeared.
One of them was Gerry Koob.
The other one was Pete McKeon,
who was his friend, another priest,
who we have not been able to locate
or talk to.
And the third was Cathy's roommate,
Russell Phillips.
Russell, unfortunately, died of cancer...
so, the information
that we have been given
about what happened
the night that Cathy disappeared
really comes in a large part
from Gerry Koob.
[Gerry] Once they discovered her body,
the police really grilled me...
because I was a man that she knew,
and that was their theory,
was that she was killed
by somebody who knew her.
[Tom] Detective Harry Bannon--
This is an exact quote 'cause it's burned
its way into my memory over many years.
"Nugent, if Father Koob didn't kill her,
he knows who did."
I was in no way involved with it,
never have been, never would have been.
I was trying to tell them
to stop investigating me
the first time I talked to them.
I said, "Here are the stubs
to the movie we were at.
Here's the restaurant we were at.
Pete and I were together the whole night."
That's fact.
We went back to my office
in the retreat house.
And I remember this detail.
We were drinking Tia Maria,
little chocolate liqueur.
And the phone rings,
and it's Russell Phillips.
[Tom] Koob told me that we got the call,
and we drove up together from Annapolis.
There's a chance that Koob forgot,
but Koob doesn't forget.
He's one smart guy.
For the first report in the morning  Sun
the day after the nun vanished,
Brother Pete McKeon
told the crime reporter
that he had learned
the nun was in terrible trouble
and drove there from Beltsville,
the suburb of Baltimore
where he lived
at the Christian Brothers Monastery.
Not from Annapolis with Koob.
[Gerry] I can remember
two or three days
at the police station being grilled,
and I remember saying to them,
"I'm Peter's alibi. Peter's my alibi.
If you're gonna come after me
for the murder,
you have to go after Peter
at the same time
because we were together that night."
[Childs] Reports indicate that Koob
and McKeon were polygraphed
regarding those statements
that they made
about going back to the house
and then coming to Ms. Russell's house.
The records only indicate
that they say they went to a movie
and that after, then they had dinner.
The polygraphs didn't indicate any signs
of deception in their story.
But Baltimore City detectives
were not able to confirm
by any eyewitness
about the time they would've left there
or the time they came back from dinner.
One of the many chores that still
has to be done here, and a big one,
is find McKeon and see if he'll tell you
anything from his point of view.
Can I find Peter?
No, I haven't pursued it that much.
I wouldn't say
we were the world's closest friends,
but, you know...
I can't tell you that he's alive still,
but did you go looking at all or...?
[man] The night that Cathy went missing,
it was Russell, Gerry,
and a third person that was there,
-a guy named Pete McKeon.
-[Marilyn] Mm-hm. Mm-hm.
[man] I called him at some point,
and he hung up on me
or the phone got disconnected.
I tried him back.
Yeah. I mean, maybe let me call.
[Pete over phone] Hello?
Hi, is this Pete McKeon?
Is this Pete McKeon?
Hi, Pete, I don't think
I've ever met you, um, and, um...
If this conversation is something
you don't wanna have with me,
I'm okay with it.
My name's Marilyn Cesnik. Um...
I'm Cathy's sister.
Right, right. I'm her little sister.
I'm her younger sister.
I know that Russell had called you
when Cathy went missing...
and that you had come there
that night with Gerry.
Uh...
I mean, I guess I'm just searching
for some answers, you know?
Thanks, Pete. Bye-bye.
He's 85.
The conversation was all over the place,
except for when you mentioned
Gerry's name,
he repeated the whole story again
and again.
I do think he's told the story
so many times
and had to tell it that that story--
Once you start him on that story,
he's gonna say the whole story.
We had dinner together,
we went to a movie,
and then we were back
when we got the call from Russell.
[Tom] "'We made the decision
that it was time
to put the heat on Koob,' Roemer recalls.
Roemer asked the Jesuit priest
again and again,
'What exactly was the nature
of your relationship with Sister Cathy?'
Father Koob insisted that the two
were simply good friends
who enjoyed a great deal of purely
platonic affection for each other.
'That's fine,' he told the priest.
'But why would Sister Russell
have called you
instead of the police after Cathy
disappeared that night?'
Roemer understood the reason better
a few days later
after visiting Father Koob's residence
at the Manresa Jesuit Community.
There, he said, he came across a letter
Cesnik had written to the priest
on November 3rd,
only a few days
before the nun vanished."
[woman as Sister Cesnik]
My very dearest Gerry:
"If Ever I Should Leave You"
is playing on the radio.
My period has finally arrived
ten days late,
so, you might say I'm moody.
My heart aches so for you.
I must wait on you,
your time and your need,
because your life is so erratic.
I think I can begin to live with that
more easily now than I did two months ago,
just loving you within myself.
I must tell you, I want you within me.
I want to have your children.
I love you.
Koob hurried to make this point
even before we started talking.
"I wanna make one thing clear.
I knew nothing of any abuse
at that school,
and Sister Cathy never breathed a word."
And I, of course, politely would say,
"She's being threatened.
She's probably left Keough
and gone to Western
because she's terrified
of what's going on there.
You're deeply in love and may get married,
yet she can never bring herself to say,
'Oh, by the way, he's raping girls
in the chaplain's office.'"
If she had said something to me
about priests...
sexually abusing girls at Keough,
if she had said anything
like that to me...
when she goes missing,
I would've steered the detectives
to look in that direction.
Later on,
this one detective kept pursuing me
and kept finding out more and more
about my relationship with Cathy.
I remember finally saying to him,
"You know, you're completely distracted.
I thought
you were trying to find the murderer...
and you're not.
You're just curious
about her relationship with me
that you don't understand,
but that's got nothing to do with this.
So, I consider you
a completely distracted detective,
and get back to doing your job."
And then he got up and did something
for which I will never forgive him.
He went back to the back room...
and he handed me...
her vagina.
And he said, "You need to understand,
we're going after somebody viciously."
And he was justifying his roughness
with me.
[man] So, it was a picture of her vagina?
It was a black-- No, no.
The vagina was wrapped in newspaper.
So, it was--
It looked like a heart wrapped up.
And he threw it on the table.
I hate that guy for that.
That's nothing that would be done there.
I don't know where he came up with that.
That sounds like a dream or...
or something that I don't understand.
Not-- Not under my watch.
It might've been County. I don't know.
I can't speak for them.
I've never heard from investigators
that Koob ever made that allegation
that he was mistreated...
or threatened by something like that.
I can't imagine a pr--
Somebody would think
that a priest would cave
by telling them something's wrapped up
in a newspaper like that.
I'm not saying that "good cop, bad cop,"
those kind of techniques weren't used
in the past.
Um...
I think that's a little out there.
[Tom]
Detective Bannon's last statement to me:
"Tom, we got close to Koob
and we were ready to break it,
and a church lawyer stepped in
and chewed the police-department brass
out royally.
And from the day
those lawyers showed up...
we was pulled off Koob
and you couldn't go near him anymore."
I think what infuriated me
about this one particular guy
was he was still saying,
"There was more to that that we didn't
get to, because we were blocked."
And the idea that it had something
to do with me...
I could never make any sense
out of that story.
[Bud] Hey, if you've got a priest
and somebody's working on him
and they're getting nowhere
and nothing's being done on him,
you're making a lot of waves.
The archdiocese had a right to ask,
"Look, either charge Koob
or get the hell off of him."
The city had run him on the box.
Then when we get into it,
we ran him on the box.
And we couldn't come up with anything
that said he knew about
or knew it was gonna happen
or had any part in doing it.
We couldn't point our finger at Koob
and say he was the one.
[Marilyn] When Cathy's body was found,
we had gone to the apartment,
and I'll never forget,
Russell was sitting on the couch...
and my mother was asking her
for Cathy's things,
and I remember distinctly Russell saying,
"I can't help you.
I don't know where anything's at
right now."
She was that out of it.
She didn't talk much to begin with.
You know, she was quiet and reserved.
But at that point,
she was non-communicative.
It was beyond reserve and quiet.
[Cecilia]
Her full name was Helen Russell Phillips.
We all called her Russell.
I loved her as one of my Sisters,
but I always wondered what makes her tick.
[laughs]
And I... I... I could not connect
with her that well.
[Chris] I never could really read her.
I think Russell knew a lot more than what
she ever expressed and told people.
How could she not?
She lived in the house with Cathy.
[Patricia] After Cathy's death,
Russ and I-- We were talking one night.
I guess I was just checking in on her.
And she said, "You know, Trish,
if you wanna come live with me,
you know, I have the room here.
You're welcome to do that."
And so, I moved in, in June of 1970.
That first night...
I remember laying in the bed
that was Cathy's
and just wide awake, thinking...
"This was Cathy's room."
For almost a whole year,
I would be frightened to get out of my car
and go into the apartment.
I would park the car
and I would look at the rearview mirror,
the two side mirrors,
put whatever work I was gonna take in,
and would go charging
to get across the parking lot.
I did that every single day.
It was like, "That person
that did it to her is out there."
I wanted to know what happened
and all that, well...
I cannot remember a time
that Russell talked about Cathy.
Cathy's birthday would come and go.
No mention of Cathy at all.
I never asked questions...
but I wondered a lot.
[Cecilia] Did Russell know
what was happening to these girls?
Of course.
Mother Maurice gave them permission
to experiment with teaching
in public high school
and being nuns out in the regular world.
And I thought:
"Wow, they're leaving to do something
absolutely wonderful."
But then I also know
there are other questions,
because it wasn't long after
that Cathy was killed.
[Gemma] We've talked about the young woman
who visited Cathy
the night before she disappeared
to talk about being abused at Keough.
She was very specific
about what she remembered.
Joseph Maskell and Father Magnus
came into the apartment
as she was visiting with the two Sisters.
[Gerry] I find it hard to believe,
because Russell would've said something
about an upsetting visit the night before
from Maskell.
And the question I raised for Gemma
when she told me about it was,
"Was Russell there?"
When I questioned whether or not
she was sure
if Sister Russell was present,
she was a little bit impatient with me
and said, "I told you she was there.
She was there."
That greatly puzzles me
as to why she said nothing
to Peter and me about that...
when Cathy has disappeared.
That only makes me scratch my head.
Was she hiding something from us?
[Cecilia]
And so, could it have been something more?
Could they have been... leaving Keough
because something wasn't right
and they were trying
to expose this priest?
Were they threatened?
I don't know. I've never...
actually had the answer to that
in my own mind.
[Bud] Sister Helen Russell Phillips
was with these priests.
They were all real closely associated.
It was all in the circle, and the killer
was someone in that circle.
Sister Phillips knows a shit-lot more
than she's ever told the police.
Phillips didn't say nothing to me
or nobody else that I know of,
but I still say she's got the key
to unlock this thing.
[computer chimes]
Okay. Here we are.
This is kind of hard to talk about,
but I did some research on maggots.
I know there were some disagreements
between what Jean shared
about maggots being on Sister Cathy's body
and the police saying that they weren't.
We need to see documents.
I mean,
we don't know about the autopsy yet.
[Abbie] Autopsy reports in closed cases
are public record,
but the medical examiner's office said
that they refused
to have any information just out there.
They said they wouldn't release
the autopsy information
because if a perp did come forward
and was a suspect,
that might be valuable to them.
So, they didn't want the information
just out there.
So, I think that's a dead end.
[Spitz] Diane.
Can you come here a minute?
Can you find the file on this case?
-Did you find it?
-[Diane] I did.
Oh, my God. Look at that.
Hey, Diane, while you are here...
He was wondering, can you tell him
what big cases I've been involved in?
[coughs]
Well, it started with Kennedy.
John F. Kennedy.
He was with
the House Assassination Committees
with Kennedy and Martin Luther King.
He was also hired by the family...
of Mary Jo Kopechne with Ted Kennedy.
O.J., civil case against him.
JonBenet Ramsey.
Let's see, the Night Stalker,
Richard Ramirez.
-[Spitz] Spector.
-[Diane] Spector.
Oh, Casey Anthony, yes.
Oh, Casey Anthony. That was a good case.
-[Diane] There was the Memphis--
-[Spitz] Oh, the Memphis--
[Diane]
Memphis Three and the Norfolk Four.
It was the appeals on those.
And, uh, the Stairway Killer.
-[Spitz]  Not a--
-[Diane]  He consulted for the defense,
but when he gave his opinion
to the defense attorney,
he decided that was not very beneficial
for his case.
-Well, okay, thank you very much.
-You're welcome.
[Spitz]
Okay. If you are willing to look...
You know,
a picture tells a thousand words.
That's what Confucius say-- Said.
This case came to my attention
when I was in the city of Baltimore,
working at the medical examiner's office
as pathologist sometime in 1970.
Police call up and they say,
"You know, we would really like to have
Dr. Spitz come to the scene with us."
And what would I do when I get there?
I would look over the body.
I would tell the photographer
of the police,
"Why don't you take a picture
of the body as it is here?
Don't move anything.
Don't even touch the body.
Just take a picture."
And he would do that.
And this is the picture
that I'm showing you here.
And what was it--? What does it show?
Her skirt was pulled up.
The chest was bare.
The person had obviously
been severely assaulted.
Closer examination revealed...
a big defect in the side of the head.
Chest.
Aha.
This is her skull. This is the injury.
I take off the skin
so that I get the correct visualization
of this area.
This type of trauma
would be from an impact
with a dense, heavy object
that was forcefully struck
against... the, uh... skull.
So, she was probably not even dead
immediately
when the injury was inflicted.
She probably died subsequently.
Who knows for how long she remained alive?
And, um...
made it so much more sad
than it already was.
[Jean] I was remembering
for the first time back then,
and I had no idea why I was remembering it
other than I thought I was crazy.
And so, I didn't want anything to do
with anyone
who actually was remembering, too.
Abbie and Gemma
and this grassroot movement
has given me more confidence.
I am more prepared now
to meet other people
who have been abused.
And one of the things it does is,
it stops the fear of meeting them
from becoming a big monster, you know.
[doorbell rings]
-Hi.
-[Jean] Nice to meet you.
-[laughs]
-And you're-- You're Jane Doe, I take it.
-[Jean] Yeah, yeah. [laughs]
I take it you're Jane Roe?
Yes. Well...
[laughs]
-It's hard to believe I never met you.
-I know, I know.
Well...
-And you're Donna.
-Hi, I'm Donna.
-Nice to meet you.
Nice to meet you. I'm Jean.
Come in. Come in.
-I didn't even know what you looked like.
-Oh!
Back in '94 when I got the notice,
you know,
asking if I knew anything
about sexual abuse at Keough,
it was like, "Oh, my God, they know."
-[Jean] Yeah. [laughs]
-"Oh, they know.
Somebody had the nerve
to come forward."
You did a lot for my recovery, you know.
I know we lost
and they swept it under the carpet,
but it made me feel better.
[Donna] Yeah. I can't even be--
Like, now that I'm an adult,
I can't even be mad at him.
I'm mad at people that hid him
and let him, you know... Ugh.
It's just unbelievable.
Were either of you called
to the nurse's office?
'Cause I got called
to the nurse's office a lot,
and the nurse would say,
"Father Maskell wants to see you."
They both knew that I was walking
down that hallway to hell, and--
But then I think of Sister Cathy,
and I think,
"Well, maybe they were scared to death
that he was gonna kill them," you know?
My husband had a plan to kill him.
And I would go to therapy,
and I would come back and I would say,
"Nancy said don't do that, you know,
because, you know...
[all laugh]
You know, it will be us
who end up being hurt by it
because me and the kids
won't have you around."
-Right.
-But he had it planned out.
He knew what he was gonna do,
and he only didn't do it
because I had asked him not to.
I called him in '80...
and told him, "If I ever see you around me
or one of my kids, I will kill you."
[Jean] Wow. Wow.
And then another time later,
I heard he was in this church service,
and I walked into the confessional.
I was just gonna start yelling
and screaming at him, and I thought,
"Everybody will be back here
defending him."
-[Jean] Right.
-I know they'll defend him.
And so, I, you know, told him,
"Stay away from me or I'll kill you."
And I am so glad he's dead, because...
[laughs]
I don't know that I would be able
to control myself now.
Now that we're all together, you know,
we might have to carry out that...
[all laughing]
Thank you. This is really special.
[Brian] This one nightstick--
This is the one I carried all these years.
There was a lot
of different uses for these.
You could walk people with them.
If they were handcuffed, under their arm,
you could walk them.
When I was a detective
with the Baltimore Police Department
in the '90s,
I was studying to be a funeral director.
Well, I was working for some
of the local funeral homes at the time.
And we were doing a funeral
at Holy Cross Church.
And me and the funeral director
were standing outside.
Well, I saw them bring Maskell out
behind the church.
He was walking in the center
of a small squad of people,
maybe three or four.
And they put him in handcuffs
and drove him away in unmarked cars.
In the city, we were not allowed
just to put handcuffs on people.
You put the handcuffs on somebody,
they were under arrest.
So, to see him come out of that church
that day with handcuffs on...
there were charges to be filed,
or it was a pretty intense investigation
going on.
There would have to be some kind
of paper trail.
You just don't take somebody
out of a building,
put him in a car, take him somewhere,
and there's no paper trail.
It don't work that way.
[Abbie] There have always been stories
that there were police/government
cover-ups of Maskell's crime...
Hi. I was looking for information
on old criminal records.
They said if I came, I could look up names
in a log and find the case numbers?
...that he was never criminally charged
even though he had multiple accusations
of abuse
and that he was protected
by the church and the state.
I'm pretty conservative,
or I'm the doubting Thomas.
Give me documentation. Give me proof.
But it's been two years now, and...
we're being told that documentation
we have every reason to know existed
does not exist.
I've written letters
to the City of Baltimore Police,
to the CIA, the FBI,
Freedom of Information Act request.
"Dear Baltimore City Police Department:
This is a request
under the Maryland Public Information Act.
I am requesting copies of all complaints
made to the Baltimore City Sex Crimes Unit
that named Father A. Joseph Maskell."
We know that between 30 and 100
Keough women
went to the Baltimore City Police
Sex Crimes Division in 1994.
[Beverly] The police came to our office
and met with and spoke to our victims.
All of my notes...
from my interviews with the victims,
including their contact information,
and my notes of what they described
happening to them, I turned over.
Once I turned things over... I don't know.
"Dear Mrs. Schaub:
After your first letter,
I conducted a database search.
The Sex Offense Unit had advised me they
did not have files for Joseph Maskell.
The Homicide Section also advised
that they do not have any files
concerning Joseph Maskell.
There is no other place to search
for the records you were asking for.
Sorry I could not be of more help."
Why are these documents not available?
Why are they not found?
Yeah, I don't understand
how that would be, you know,
unless the reports were just made
to disappear.
If there were detectives in Baltimore
working this case,
there would be a case folder there...
and the state's attorney's office
would have a case folder...
because they would get copies
of everything.
[man] Where would those statements be?
Would they be destroyed for some reason,
do you know, or...?
Well, keep in mind
that, um, this was the mid-'90s,
so, things were not kept in a computer.
They would have just been pieces of paper
in a folder.
[Abbie] So, there's a Jane Roe
and a Jane Doe v. Maskell and all.
Somewhere in these records,
it says that documents from the dig...
were shown to the judge privately
in chambers.
The cover here says
"With one box of exhibits."
Now, we would've loved
to see the exhibits,
but they say it's just gone.
It's not there.
We've now heard that
the cemetery-dig documents were stored
in a basement evidence room
that was flooded during a storm
and were just destroyed and disposed of.
It seems like all the hard documents
that we've tried to get from the city...
have just disappeared.
They're just not there.
And I am very uncomfortable
that the Baltimore City
State's Attorney's Office
opted not to bring any criminal charges
against Father Maskell.
I went down to the Baltimore City
Courthouse several times.
I went to the archives.
-Are you in line?
-Yeah.
Okay.
[Abbie] We found not only Maskell,
but there was virtually no priests
in Baltimore
that had been found guilty
of sex-abuse crimes,
despite the archdiocese list of '02
that had maybe 50 names on it.
And when I go through the civil cases
that were filed against the priests
and the archdiocese,
every one I can find was either dismissed
on the statute of limitations
or it was settled by the church
with a cash settlement.
So, there were no findings.
No Catholic priest was ever found guilty
of abuse there either.
[man] I don't know if you remember this,
but in 2002 the archdiocese
published a list of abusive priests,
and it had over 50 names,
and as far as we can find,
there's only one case in Baltimore City
where a guilty verdict happened.
And in that case,
the priest pleaded guilty.
Why is that?
Well, once again,
you've gotta have the evidence, okay?
If the evidence isn't there
to meet the standard of proof
beyond a reasonable doubt,
you can't go forward.
[Abbie] My mood changes.
Some weeks I'm angry and burned out
and just wanna say
we've done what we can.
You're not sure if it's just
a complete waste of your time and energy,
or whether
there's some strategic advantage
to just politely nibbling away, saying,
"Hey, we're paying attention.
We're still here."
You would think that this was
a significant enough high-profile case
that there would be records saved
about the investigation,
about the complaints.
It's hard to believe
that there's nothing there.
[Gerry] Ocean Heights Presbyterian Church.
I think whoever did it is guilty...
and has had to live with something
for a long time, hiding...
concealing, avoiding.
You know, has lived a miserable life
wrapped around it.
I'd be the first person to tell you
that the first person
to forgive him would be Cathy.
That's the kind of person she was.
And she would inspire--
Has inspired forgiveness in me,
whoever he is.
I can't walk around
with that anger inside me.
I want to locate the discussion tonight
about the real meaning of Yom Kippur,
seeking perfection...
and then acknowledging failures
and then seeking it again.
I can't help but think,
for those of us who were raised
in the Catholic community, this is what?
Going to confession on Saturday,
going to Communion on a Sunday,
and then coming back the next Saturday
and needing to go to confession again.
It had nothing to do...
with being rescued
from a fall called original sin.
[Diane] Well, Gerry and I met...
um, when I was in my last year seminary
at the United Theological Seminary
of the Twin Cities.
We didn't hit it off very well at first.
I was in a fairly newfound feminist phase.
And I had a lot
of anti-Catholic sentiment.
I thought a lot of the stuff
that had been important to him in his life
was pretty much nonsense.
[laughs]
You know?
Just calling people "Father" and,
you know...
But somehow we started talking,
and he talked about Cathy,
this very dear friend, this person
he loved who was killed, and I--
Then I said, "Well, I had someone,
actually my first love,
who was killed in Vietnam."
And that opened the door.
The rest, as they say, is history.
But that that drew us together.
Our values, our commitment to ministry,
to trying to work for love and justice
and peace in the world,
all of those things drew us together.
There is a passage in Scripture
about everything that is in darkness
being brought to light.
If there were ever any remote possibility
that he had been involved
in something criminal...
I would want that brought to light.
The truth is more important than some...
story that we tell ourselves
to keep our lives...
untroubled on the surface.
-Hey, how was the class?
-Hello.
[Diane]
I'm confident that he was not involved.
I believe he was not in any way involved
in anything
that would ever have harmed or hurt her
or anyone else.
And I've lived with him for 34 years,
so, I think I have a good read on that.
[Marilyn] After Cathy disappeared,
I went back to school,
and I was at my dorm.
I hadn't been back long,
so, I'm thinking it had to be
about a week afterwards.
And I went in the evening,
got my mail from my mailbox,
and that's when the letter was there
from Cathy.
Her handwriting was very distinctive.
It was Cathy's handwriting.
I called my father,
who'd worked for the post office.
He said, "Tell me everything
that the postmark says."
He said, "Marilyn,
it was sent after Cathy went missing.
It was not sent before.
Stay there and don't move
and don't open it,
because it could be evidence.
So, please, don't open it, Marilyn."
You know? You can imagine how much
I really wanted to open that letter.
I remember expecting a policeman to come,
but it was somebody--
It must've been a plainclothes policeman.
He didn't have a uniform on.
I called my father and I said
whoever came to get that letter
was not dressed as a policeman.
He said, "It was probably a detective.
Don't worry about that.
You did the right thing
by giving it to them."
For all these years, the fact
that I was told that it was evidence
and that's why they couldn't release it
made me think that--
What is in that card?
What did it say? What did it say?
The detectives that I met with
when I went to Baltimore in March--
I was there
to give them my contact information
since my parents were dead.
Is there anything new? Anything going on?
Do you know who did it?
But also to tell you
I would really like my letter,
and I understand that's evidence,
and if I'm not even allowed to touch it,
could we--?
Could I just look at it?
Could I read it?
They said they can't find it.
It must have been lost.
It existed. There's no doubt it existed.
There's no doubt
it was given to the police.
There's no doubt the police had it.
Where is it?
[man]
Marilyn Cesnik, who's Cathy's sister,
said that she received a letter
after Cathy went missing.
Yes.
[man] Could it have had a clue about what
engagement present she had bought her?
'Cause Marilyn was the one
who had just gotten engaged.
My understanding from her is that
the letter is lost or has disappeared?
Yeah, well, I know about the letter.
I have information about the letter,
that there was a letter received
by her sister afterwards.
[man] But as far as I know, the letter
isn't a part of the evidence anymore.
[Robin] The city would have had possession
of that,
and we've never seen it.
[man] So, what you're saying, I think,
Robin, is that you know that it wasn't--
At least right now, you know it wasn't
part of the evidence handed to County?
It's not in our evidence room.
-Do we got a copy of the beast?
-[Robin] Yes.
So, we don't have anything from the city.
[Robin] Correct.
[Childs] Can you give me one sec?
I gotta call the city and see
if they still got evidence down there.
I made a bunch of calls,
talked to some people.
Haven't been able to verify
that the letter was ever turned over to us
from the city.
Uh... It was something
that was heard about but never--
We-- From what I just got
from the phone calls I made,
we never received any physical evidence
from the city.
So, I can't tell you.
I would have thought any documentation,
any physical evidence that would
have been recovered by the city
during the missing-person investigation,
would have been turned over
to Baltimore County.
[man] Marilyn says it was
either postmarked on the Monday
or Tuesday I believe.
[Robin] It was postmarked on the 8th.
I've got it here.
You got the letter?
[Robin] No, not the letter,
but I have the information on the letter.
[man] Interesting. So, there's a log
of it being turned over as evidence,
but there's no--
There's no indication
of what was inside of it or what--?
-It doesn't say what the letter said?
-[Robin] No.
It says there was an envelope
addressed to Ms. Marilyn...
with Cathy's handwriting.
I mean,
if they came into possession of it,
it should be somewhere.
It should've been kept.
[Gemma] What I'm looking at
is the autopsy report from Cathy Cesnik,
and it's my understanding that,
aside from the police and Cathy's family,
that nobody else has had a chance
to look at this.
I received this from Cathy's sister.
Marilyn's never read this,
and she wants this information
to be public information
because she feels like it's important,
I guess, for people to do what I did,
just analyze this against what I know
about the situation,
measuring it against what we already
have found out from other people.
Last year, we had the opportunity to talk
to James Scannell,
the supervising officer on duty
the day that Cathy's body was found.
James Scannell said
there were no maggots on Cathy's body.
Jean Wehner has told us
that she was taken to see Cathy's body
and that there were maggots
on Cathy's face.
[Tom] I have had police cold-case
investigators snicker and laugh.
I remember the line, I think,
from one cold-case investigator to me was,
"Let's just say that Jane Doe
has a poor memory, okay?
She dreamed things
that could not have occurred.
Cold weather does not allow for maggots."
[man] People always tell us
that the Baltimore County Police
say that some of the details
of Jane Doe's recount
weren't possible or weren't true.
So, I often wonder,
when Jane Doe came forward in 1994
and said Father Maskell took her
to see the body of Sister Cathy,
if the Baltimore County Police,
have always thought
her story doesn't make sense.
I really can't comment on, you know,
the credibility of that witness...
relative to another investigator.
I never spoke to her.
I never interviewed her.
[man]
One of the details that she always said
about Sister Cathy's body being found
was that...
she wiped maggots
off of her face when she saw it,
and what we've always heard
is that that was always discredited
because maggots would not be present
in the winter.
Does that come up in the records at all?
[Childs] It's in the autopsy...
that there were maggots internally,
in the trachea and in the mouth.
That's true.
[Spitz] When a fly lays an egg,
in a day, the egg is converted
into a living, moving maggot.
A tiny maggot.
The maggot grows in one week--
In seven days,
the maggot grows to about an inch.
And flies don't... propagate
in the wintertime.
[Gemma] This is November 7th.
When Sister Cathy first disappeared,
55 degrees.
November 9th, 57.
The line graph is going up.
Well, the fact that there were maggots
is indisputable.
If I said maggots, there were maggots.
So, there must have been some sunny
and warmer days.
[Gemma]
We continued to get warmer and warmer.
Monday was 62 degrees.
Oh, my God.
I always believed Jean,
but this is clear evidence right here
that what she says she saw
was definitely there.
The truth is here in black and white.
Support us and become VIP member
to remove all ads from www.OpenSubtitles.org